Amplicon iIlumina NF conversion: Added launch scripts and diagnostic plots (#143)
nasa/GeneLab_Data_Processing: Amplicon/Illumina/Pipeline_GL-DPPD-7104_Versions/GL-DPPD-7104-C.md

* **beta_diversity/<output_prefix><distance_method>_variance_table_GLAmpSeq.csv** (comma-separated table(s) containing the degrees of freedom (df), sum of squares (sumsq), mean square (meansq), F-statistic (statistic), and p-value for the groups (variation explained by experimental groups) and residual (unexplained variation) sources of variation (terms) for the specified distance analysis, Euclidean or Bray-Curtis)
* **beta_diversity/<output_prefix><distance_method>_PCoA_without_labels_GLAmpSeq.png** (Principle Coordinates Analysis plots of VST transformed and rarefy transformed ASV counts for Euclidean and Bray-Curtis distance methods, respectively, without sample labels)
* **beta_diversity/<output_prefix><distance_method>_PCoA_w_labels_GLAmpSeq.png** (Principle Coordinates Analysis plots of VST transformed and rarefy transformed ASV counts for Euclidean and Bray-Curtis distance methods, respectively, with sample labels)

> * beta_diversity/<output_prefix>vsd_validation_plot.png (VST transformation validation diagnostic plot)

Reviewer: should this be bold?

Author: I wasn't sure it was a required output (to be uploaded on OSDR) so I didn't make it bold.

Reviewer 2: Yes, let's publish this plot on the repo since it was specifically asked for by the AWGs.

## 10. Differential Abundance Testing

> Differential abundance testing aims to uncover specific taxa that exhibit notable variations across different conditions, complemented by visualizations like volcano plots to illustrate these disparities and their implications on ASV abundance and overall microbial community dynamics. ANCOMBC 1, ANCOMBC 2, and DESeq2 provide 3 different methods for calculating differential abundance. We provide ANCOMBC 1 and 2 because of the compositional nature of the microbiome with both tools being composition aware. DESeq2 was implemented as a popular chioce that assumes a negative binomial model for the dataset. We provide diagnostic plots (VST validation and ASV sparsity plots) to assess whether DESeq2 is appropriate for your dataset.

Reviewer: I reworded the discussion about algorithm choice. Please check that it is still accurate.

```suggestion
Differential abundance testing aims to uncover specific taxa that exhibit notable variations across different conditions, complemented by visualizations like volcano plots to illustrate these disparities and their implications on ASV abundance and overall microbial community dynamics. ANCOMBC 1, ANCOMBC 2, and DESeq2 provide 3 different methods for calculating differential abundance. ANCOMBC 1 and 2 were specifically designed to handle the compositional nature of microbiome data. This pipeline also implements DESeq2 because it is a popular choice for differential abundance. DESeq2 assumes a negative binomial model and can have issues with sparse data, which is frequently true in microbiome datasets. Two diagnostic plots (VST validation and ASV sparsity plots) help assess whether DESeq2 is appropriate for a given dataset. The VST validation plot assesses whether VST is successfully stabilizing variance. The ASV sparsity plot helps users determine if their data is too sparse to use DESeq2 to assess differential abundance.
```

Author: Excellent! I couldn't have written it any better.

Reviewer 2: I think we should actually make a general recommendation. I propose the following:

Differential abundance testing aims to uncover specific taxa that exhibit notable variations across different conditions, complemented by visualizations like volcano plots to illustrate these disparities and their implications on ASV abundance and overall microbial community dynamics. ANCOMBC 1, ANCOMBC 2, and DESeq2 provide 3 different methods for calculating differential abundance. ANCOMBC 1 and 2 were specifically designed to handle the compositional nature of microbiome data. ANCOMBC 2 is an improved version of ANCOMBC 1 particularly for datasets with high sparsity, small sample sizes, or longitudinal and correlated experimental designs. Therefore, in general, we recommend using the ANCOMBC 2 differential abundance data, although all differential abundance data outputs should be evaluated in the context of the question(s) the user seeks to answer with these data. This pipeline also implements DESeq2 because it is a popular choice for differential abundance. DESeq2 assumes a negative binomial model and can have issues with sparse data, which is frequently true in microbiome datasets. Two diagnostic plots (VST validation and ASV sparsity plots) help assess whether DESeq2 is appropriate for a given dataset. The VST validation plot assesses whether VST is successfully stabilizing variance. The ASV sparsity plot helps users determine if the data is too sparse to use DESeq2 to assess differential abundance.

Reviewer: I like the addition of the general recommendation, but would move it to the end, after the discussion of DESeq2. I think it will stand out better if it's the last sentence (though an equal argument could be made for putting it first...depending on how we assume people skim text). If we choose to make it first, we'd have to reword it a bit. If we just move it to the end, we can just move the sentence as-is.

Reviewer 2: Okay, so like the following:
*Note that I added a ">" before the recommendation so it will stand out a bit more in the document

----------

Differential abundance testing aims to uncover specific taxa that exhibit notable variations across different conditions, complemented by visualizations like volcano plots to illustrate these disparities and their implications on ASV abundance and overall microbial community dynamics. ANCOMBC 1, ANCOMBC 2, and DESeq2 provide 3 different methods for calculating differential abundance. ANCOMBC 1 and 2 were specifically designed to handle the compositional nature of microbiome data. ANCOMBC 2 is an improved version of ANCOMBC 1 particularly for datasets with high sparsity, small sample sizes, or longitudinal and correlated experimental designs. This pipeline also implements DESeq2 because it is a popular choice for differential abundance. DESeq2 assumes a negative binomial model and can have issues with sparse data, which is frequently true in microbiome datasets. Two diagnostic plots (VST validation and ASV sparsity plots) help assess whether DESeq2 is appropriate for a given dataset. The VST validation plot assesses whether VST is successfully stabilizing variance. The ASV sparsity plot helps users determine if the data is too sparse to use DESeq2 to assess differential abundance.
> In general, we recommend using the ANCOMBC 2 differential abundance data, although all differential abundance data outputs should be evaluated in the context of the question(s) the user seeks to answer with these data.

----------

Author: Updated. Thanks!

  - For each group:
    - Group.Mean_(group) (mean within group)
    - Group.Stdev_(group) (standard deviation within group))

> * differential_abundance/deseq2/<output_prefix>asv_sparsity_plot.png (a diagnostic plot of ASV sparsity to be used to assess if running DESeq2 is appropriate)

Reviewer: Should be bold since it's an output.

Author: OK, we can make it bold.

Author: Done!
